Party supporters painted stadiums in Johannesburg red, yellow and blue as the EFF, ANC and DA rallied for votes over the final election campaign weekend.  5 May 2019: Buses brought numerous supporters to Orlando Stadium in Soweto, where the EFF held its final election campaign rally. The party promoted the event as its Tshela Thupa rally. (Photograph by James Oatway)  5 May 2019: ANC supporters caught buses provided by the ruling party to Ellis Park Stadium for its rally. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  4 May 2019: DA supporters arriving at the party’s last election campaign rally before 8 May at Dobsonville Stadium in Soweto. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  4 May 2019: DA supporters listening to party leader Mmusi Maimane's address. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  5 May 2019: Behind the stage at the EFF’s last rally before polling day. (Photograph by James Oatway)  5 May 2019: A brass band waiting to perform during the ANC rally in Johannesburg. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  5 May 2019: Artist Tebogo Morabe from Orange Farm was selling earrings at Orlando Stadium during the EFF rally. (Photograph by James Oatway)  5 May 2019: While many supporters listened attentively to President Cyril Ramaphosa’s keynote speech during the ANC rally, some didn’t find the speech overly exciting and took a nap instead. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  4 May 2019: DA supporters came out in their numbers, painting the Dobsonville Stadium blue ahead of national elections on 8 May. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  4 May 2019: Two girls playing outside the Dobsonville Stadium during the DA event, under the watchful eye of Ramaphosa. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  5 May 2019: Wheelchair-bound ANC supporter Casper Moretsi from Bekkersdal was hopeful that Ramaphosa would encourage government departments to start doing more for people with disabilities. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  5 May 2019: Elderly members of the ANC Women’s League walk hand in hand into Ellis Park stadium for the ANC’s final rally ahead of the 8 May elections. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  5 May 2019: Thulisile Masanabo from Kliptown was selling souvenirs at the EFF rally. Her daughter Neo ‘is already a fighter’, she said. (Photograph by James Oatway)  4 May 2019: Up close with a DA supporter at Dobsonville Stadium in Soweto. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  5 May 2019: Kaizer Chiefs’ most famous fan, Saddam Maake, showing his support for the ANC and in particular its president. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  5 May 2019: (From left) ANC supporters Avele Lugedle, Cikizwa Sipani and Noncedo Lugedle enjoying the pre-speech entertainment. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  5 May 2019: A cardboard coffin replica covered with an ANC T-shirt carried an emotive message during the EFF rally. (Photograph by James Oatway)  5 May 2019: ANC supporters streaming into Ellis Park Stadium for the ANC’s final campaign event. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  4 May 2019: Ticker tape explodes and fills the air in the Dobsonville Stadium during the DA rally. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  5 May 2019: One of the ANC bikers performing a trick as the group made their way around Ellis Park Stadium. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  5 May 2019: Pastor and gospel star Neyi Zimu sings and prays for EFF leader Julius Malema. (Photograph by James Oatway)  5 May 2019: Malema arriving at his party’s Tshela Thupa rally in Soweto. (Photograph by James Oatway)  5 May 2019: Ramaphosa waving to the thousands of ANC supporters gathered at Ellis Park Stadium. (Photograph by Ihsaan Haffejee)  4 May 2019: DA leader Mmusi Maimane addressing supporters on the last weekend before election day on 8 May. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  4 May 2019: Maimane said ‘we will never, ever divide the people of this country … We will never return to the days of us and them’. He reiterated wanting a job in every home and asked voters to ‘give change a chance’. (Photograph by Madelene Cronjé)  5 May 2019: Malema said that ‘women can be better leaders, they’ve always been better leaders’, referencing Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, and vowed to clamp down on crime and improve community relationships with the police. (Photograph by James Oatway)